---
title: My love for Simone Giertz and Mark Rober
description: Learning to fall in love with engineering.
createdAt: "2021-06-01T20:30:00.001Z"
path: "/blog/my-love-for-simone-mark"
---
Let's face it. YouTube can be an amazing source of inspiration or a harbinger of despondency. This is clearly dictated by which rabbit hole you found yourself in at 2AM yesterday. Of all the various rabbit holes that one could go into (or be algorithmically coerced into), there aren't many that are better than works of people like Simone Giertz and Mark Rober. 

If you haven't seen content from these mad geniuses you are certainly missing out. Every few months I find myself going into a sort of software engineering block where I am barely keeping up with everything at work. I have no interest in finding the best engineering solution to a problem and am more than happy lobbing brute force code at a pesky little feature until it caves for the short term. Of course, there is always hell to pay later when the bad solution inevitable breaks the entire product, but that is a problem for future Shreyas. At times like that (and at all other times), watching videos from Simone and Mark make me fall back in love with Software Engineering. Watching them take on outrageous and often silly projects with a child like glee makes me want to reach the same state of happiness with my work. Sure, I might not be [cutting a Tesla in half to build a pick up truck](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jKv_N0IDS2A) or [creating an obstacle course for squirrels in my back yard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTvS9lvRxZ8), but I find their joy infectious and I can certainly channel that joy into my work. 

There are times when I badly want to do the things that they do but I often end up thinking that I don't have any "good ideas" to pursue. One important lesson to take away from their channels is that there are never any good ideas. There is a decent idea followed by great implementation. I'm sure it would have been easy for Simone to go "I really need a truck. I want an electric car. Oh well. I guess I that option doesn't exist. Too bad". Instead, they follow through with their crazy plans and get something going.

Derek Sivers puts it really well in his conversation with [Shane Parrish on The Knowledge Project](https://fs.blog/knowledge-project/derek-sivers/) podcast when he says that a good idea is worth $20. A bad idea is probably worth $1. A bad implementation is worth $1000 and great implementation is worth a million dollars. It's the implementation that matters. A bad idea, implemented well is still better than a good idea implemented badly. An idea by itself is worthless.

Videos from Simone, Mark and other creators shows that crazy ideas, when implemented well can really do wonders. For now, this little blog snippet is my creative endeavor. It's not the best idea. Gushing about engineers who have millions of fans all over the world is certainly not a novel idea but it's the one that resonates with me at the moment and I took out 10 minutes of my day to follow through with it. I hope you take 10 minutes off your day to pursue an idea that crossed your mind today.